# ARCHIVED SNAPSHOT
# Original URL: https://sb.judiciary.gov.ph/RESOLUTIONS/2020/F_Crim_SB-11-CRM-0282-0283_People%20vs%20Padaca,%20et%20al_06_23_2020.pdf
# Archived copy via Wayback capture 20211117004717 (PDF, 32 pages)
# Extracted: text layer via pypdf 6.19.0; sha256 of PDF: 3f0c184ddc0111fe (truncated in MANIFEST)

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
SANDIGANBAYAN
Quezon City
THIRD DIVISION
PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINES,
Plaintiff,
Crim. Case No.
SB-II-CRM-0282
For: Malversation of Public
Funds under Art. 217 of the
Revised Penal Code
-versus-
Crim. Case No.
SB-II-CRM-0283
For: Violation of Section
3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019
MA. GRACIA CIELO M. PADACA,
ET AL.,
Accused. Present:
CABOTAJE-TANG, P.J.,
Chairperson
FERNANDEZ, B., J
MORENO, J.
Promulgated:
-----------------=-~-~~'-~~x----------------
RESOLUTION----------
/?
tbl
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaea, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-2-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
CABOTAJE-TANG, P.J.:
For resolution is the Motion for Reconsideration dated
December 2, 2019,1 filed by accused Maria Gracia Cielo M.
Padaca, through counsel, which seeks the reversal of the
Court's Decision promulgated on November 15, 2019,2 finding
her guilty of the crimes of: (1) malversation of public funds,
defined and penalized under Article 21 7 of the Revised Penal
Code [RPC], as amended, and (2) violation of Section 3 [e] of
Republic Act [R.A.] No. 3019, otherwise known as the Anti-Graft
and Corrupt Practices Act.
Accused Padaca anchors her motion for reconsideration
on the following arguments:
A.
C:riminal Case No. SB-II-CRM-0282
For: Malversation of Public Funds
1. The Court erred in holding the accused to be an
accountable officer under Article 217 of the Revised Penal
Code.",
2. The Honorable Court erred in holdingthat she "failed to
use the reasonable care and caution which an ordinary person
would have used in the same situation when she authorized the
release of the PhP25,OOO,OOO.00 to the Economic Development
for Western Isabela and Northern Luzon Foundation, Inc.
(EDWINLFIJ' ;4
-.l
3. The Honorable Court erred in holding that "Padaca's act
of entering into the MOA was without authority of the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan considering that when she signed
the same on January 8, 2006, she was not authorized by the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan to do so, ignoring the fact that the
/7I p. 596, Vol. XXI, Record
2 p. 519, Vol. x.,XI, Record
3 p. 3, Motion;p. 598, id
4 p. 4, id;p. 599, id
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-3-
MOA was unqualifiedly ratified by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan in Resolution No. 03";5
4. The Honorable Court erred in holding that "there is no
way to determine how the said amount (PhP25, 000, 000. 00) was
disbursed by EDWINLFl' and "there is no way to ascertain
whether the farmer beneficiaries properly returned the money
they received from EDWINLFl';6
5. The Honorable Court erred in holding that the accused
was "grossly and inexcusably negligent in allowing EDWINLFI to
take public funds without any scheme for repaumeni";' and
6. The Honorable Court erred in not acquitting the accused
for the failure of the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable
doubt its allegation in the Information that "the funds were not,
in fact awarded to the farmers of Isabela who are the supposed
recipients of its provincial rice program."8
B.
Criminal Case No. SB-II-CRM-0283
For: Violation of Section 3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019
1. The Honorable Court erred in not acquitting the accused
for failure of the prosecution to prove that the accused gave
"unwarranted benefits and advantage to EDWINLFl' by
"dispensing with the conduct of a public bidding' and
"transferring public funds in the amount of Twenty Five Million
Pesos (P25, 000,000. 00) for services yet to be rendered'<
2. The Honorable Court convicted the accused based on
facts not alleged in the Information; 10 and
/?
fit!
I
s p. 5, id;p. 600, id
6 p. 6, id;p. 601, id
7 id;id
8 p. 7, id;p. 602, id
9 p. 9, id;p. 604, id
10 Id;id
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB··II-CRM-0282-0283
-4-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
3. The Court erred in holding that the Provincial
Government "suffered undue injury in the total amount of
P18,000,000.00 and EDWINLFI merely returned P7,000,000.00
out of the P25, 000, 000. 00 transferred to it."ll
During the hearing on the said motion on December 6,
2019, the prosecution requested, and was granted, a period of
ten (10) days from the said date within which to file its comment
andj or opposition to the subject motion. 12
Conformably with the said request, on December 23,
2019, the prosecution filed its Opposition dated December 21,
2019, where it prays for the denial of accused Padaca's motion
for reconsideration for lack of mer'it.F'
THE RULING OF THE COURT
A.
C:riminal Case No. SB-II-CRM-0282
For: Malversation of Public Funds
1. Accused Padaca is an
accountable officer within
the contemplation. of Article
217 of the Revised Penal
Code.
--------------------------------------------------
Accused Padaca asserts that her conviction for the crime
of malversation of public funds by the Court is erroneous.
According to her, the "Information ... alleges that the Accused is
not an accountable officer under Article 217 of the Revised Penal
Code, but pursuant to Section 340 of the Local Government Code
which provides that (Other local officers, who though not
~
~I
11 p. 10, id;p. 605, id.
12 Order dated December 6, 2:019; p. 631, id
13 p. 625, id
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-5-
accountable by the nature of their duties may be held
accountable and responsible for local government funds through
the participation in the use or application thereof"14 "In this case,
the 'participation' of the Accused in the use or application of
P25, 000, 000. 00 was strictly limited to her act of entering into the
MOA with EDWINLFI; her participation began and ended with her
act of entering into the MOA. It would be quite a stretch of reason
and logic to hold the Accused an accountable officer because of
her act of entering into the MOA."15
The Court finds the said argument devoid of merit.
In Zoleta vs. Sandiganbayan (Fourth Division), et al.,16
the Supreme Court had the opportunity to discuss who is an
accountable officer within the contemplation of Article 217 of
the Revised Penal Code. Thus:
Third, Vice-Governor Constantino and Camanay were
accountable public officers. Under the Government Auditing
Code of the Philippines, an accountable public officer is a
public officer who, by reason of his office, is accountable
for public funds or property. The Local Government Code
expanded this definition with regard to local government
officials. Section 340 of the LGC reads:
Section 340. Persons Accountable for Local
Government Funds. - Any officer of the local
government unit whose duty permits or requires
the possession or custody of local government
funds shall be accountable and responsible for
the safekeeping thereof in conformity with the
provisions of this title. Other local officials,
though not accountable by the nature of their
duties, may likewise be similarly held
accountable and responsible for local
government funds through their participation
in the use or application thereof.
H pp. 1-2, Motionfor Reconsideration;pp. 596-597, id
15 p. 2, id;p. 597, id
16765 Phi!. 39 (2015)
Local government officials become accountable public
officers either (1) because of the nature of their functions; or
/7
J1
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-6-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
(2) on account of their participation in the use or application
of public funds.
As a required standard procedure, the signatures of,
among others, the Vice-Governor and the Provincial
Accountant are needed before any disbursement of public
funds can be made. No checks can be prepared and no
payment can be effected without their signatures on a
disbursement voucher and the corresponding check. In
other words, any disbursement and release of public funds
require their approval. Thus, Constantino and Camanay,
in their capacities as Vice-Governor and Provincial
Accountant, had control and responsibility over the
subject funds.!?
Plainly, a public official becomes an accountable officer
within the contemplation of Article 217 of the Revised Penal
Code either (1) because of the nature of their functions; or (2)
on account of their participation in the use or application of
public funds. In Zoleta, the accused Vice-Governor and
Provincial Accountant therein were considered as accountable
public officers because their respective signatures are needed
before any disbursement of public funds can be made. No
checks can be prepared and no payment can be effected without
their signatures on a disbursement voucher and the
corresponding check.
Here, the pieces of documentary evidence presented by the
prosecution negate accused Padaca's claim that her
participation in the "application" of the subject funds was
strictly limited to her act of entering into the MOA with
EDWINLFI.
The prosecution presented evidence that accused Padaca,
as Governor of Isabela, approved Disbursement Voucher
dated February 8, 2006,18 which authorized the transfer of
the amount of PhP25,000,000.00 to EDWINLFI. She likewise
signed DBP Check No. 6797814 dated February 23, 2006,19
in the amount of PhP25,000,000.00, in favor EDWINLFI.
Plainly, the transfer of the amount of PhP25,OOO,OOO.OO by the
/7
;to17 Emphasis supplied
18 Exhibit P-l
19 Exhibit P-3
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-7-
Province of Isabela to EDWINLFI could not have been effected
without the approval of accused Padaca.
Conformably with the teachings of the Supreme Court in
Zoleta, there is no question that accused Padaca, as the
Governor of the Province of Isabela at the time material to these
cases, was an accountable public official within the purview of
Article 21 7 of the Revised Penal Code.
11. The subsequent ratification by the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan of the
Province of Isabela of the MOA
entered into by accused Padaca
with EDWINLFI did not extinguish
her criminal liability.
--------------------------------------------------------------
Accused Padaca claims that the Court erred in ruling that
her act of entering into the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA)
with EDWINLFI was without the authority of the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan. According to her, said ruling ignores the fact that
the MOA was expressly and unqualifiedly ratified by the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan. "The case ofMariano Un Ocampo
v. People2d is squarely in point on the significance of the
ratification. This case involved a charge of malversation of public
funds against Governor Mariano Ocampo for failing to account for
the release of government funds pursuant to [MOA] with the
Tarlac Foundation, Inc. which he entered into without authority
from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, resulting in the
disappearance of a portion of the total funds released. In
exonerating Governor Ocampo, the Supreme Court brushed aside
the issue of lack of authority of Governor Ocampo, on the ground
that (the MOA has been impliedly ratified by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan as it has not directly impugned the validity of the
MOA despite knowledge of the controversy."21
~
Ji20 543 seRA 487 (2008)
21p. 13, Motion for Reconsideration;p. 608, VD!. XXI, Record
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-8-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
Accused Padaca's reliance on Ocampo is highly misplaced
since its factual backdrop is not on all fours with these cases.
In Ocampo, one of the petitioners therein was the former
governor of the Province of Tarlac from 1988 to 1992 (Ocampo
Ill). During his incumbency, the Province of Tarlac was chosen
as one of the four (4) provinces that will serve as a test case on
decentralization of local government administration. For this
purpose, the Department of Budget and Management (DBM)
released National Aid for Local Government Units (NALGU)
funds in the total amount of PhP100 Million to the Province of
Tarlac. The petitioner then loaned PhP56.6 Million out of the
PhP100 Million to the Lingkod Tarlac Foundation, Inc. (LTFI) for
the implementation of various livelihood projects. The loan was
made pursuant to a MOA entered into by the Province of Tarlac,
represented by the petitioner, and LTFI, represented by one
Andres S. Flares, the other petitioner therein.
How the PhP56.6 Million released to LTFI was utilized
became the subject matter of twenty-five (25) criminal cases. In
its Resolution dated October 22, 1992, the Supreme Court
quashed nineteen (19) of the twenty (25) Informations filed
against the petitioners. The Fifth Division of the Sandiganbayan
dismissed one (1) case on demurrer to evidence. In its Decision
promulgated on March 8, 2002, the Fifth Division of the
Sandiganbayan dismissed two (2) of the five (5) criminal cases
for malversation of public funds against petitioners. On motion
for reconsideration, the Sandiganbayan dismissed one (1) more
case in a Resolution promulgated on January 6,2003. The two
(2) remaining cases then became the subject matter of petitions
elevated to the Supreme Court.
From this factual backdrop, the Supreme Court resolved
these two pivotal (2) issues in Ocampo, to wit:
1. Whether or not petitioners Ocampo and
Flares are guilty of the crime of malversation of public
funds under Articles 217 and 220, respectively, of the
Revised Penal Code; and
., ~
/6i/
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-9-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
2. Whether or not the Sandiganbayan erred in
holding that the MOA is void and did not bind the
Province of Tarlac on the ground that the MOA was
entered into by petitioner Ocampo without authority
from the Sangguniang Panlalawigan in violation of
the Local Government Code of 1983.
In resolving the first issue, the Supreme Court gave
credence to the arguments of the petitioners therein that the
funds loaned by the Province of Tarlac to LFI are no longer
public funds considering that the MOA entered into by the
Province of Tarlac and LFI was actually one of loan. Thus:
The MOA shows that LTFI is "allowed to borrow funds
directly from the Provincial Government to fund Lingkod
Tarlac Foundation projects provided the projects are
livelihood projects under the Rural Industrialization Can
Happen Program." Moreover, the agreement stipulates under
the "Conditions for Release of Funds" that the Province of
Tarlac "shall release in lump sum the appropriate funds for
the approved projects covered by individual loan documents
upon signing of the respective loan agreement .... "
In Crim. Case No. 16794, the fund alleged to have been
malversed in the amount of Pl,180,496.48 represents the
discrepancy of the cost of the Juki embroidery machines as
listed in the books of LTFI and the amount actually paid to
open the letter of credit for the payment of the machines. In
the books of LTFI, the cost of the Juki embroidery machines
was listed as P8,860,000, while the amount paid to open the
letter of credit for the payment of the machines was
P7,679,530.52. Petitioner Flores was held liable only up to the
amount ofPl,132,739.
In Crim. Case No. 16795, the fund alleged to have been
malversed in the amount of P58, 000 is the money left
(P47,730) in PNB 8jA No. 490-555744-6 after the withdrawal
of the purchase price of the Juki embroidery machines, plus
interest. The amount of P58,000 was withdrawn upon the
authorization of petitioner Flores. The withdrawal was neither
reflected as deposit in the bank accounts of LTFI nor spent by
it. /'1
~
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-10-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
In both cases, the money trail proven by the prosecution
shows that the subject funds or the money used for the
purchase of the Juki embroidery machines came from the
release of the Province of Tarlac through petitioner Ocampo of
NALGU funds in the amount of P11.5 million to LTFI on
October 24, 1988. The release of the funds was covered by a
loan document in accordance with the MOA which states that
the Province of Tarlac "shall release in lump sum the
appropriate funds for the approved projects covered by
individual loan documents upon signing of the respective loan
agreement .... "
xxx
Based on the foregoing, it is clear that the funds
released by the Province of Tarlac, including the money
allegedly malversed by petitioners in Crim. Case Nos. 16794
and 16795, were in the nature of a loan to LTFI.
Art. 1953 of the Civil Code provides that "[a] person who
receives a loan of money or any other fungible thing acquires
the ownership thereof, and is bound to pay to the creditor an
equal amount of the same kind and quality."
Hence, petitioner Ocampo correctly argued that the
NALGU funds shed their public character when they were
lent to LTFI as it acquired ownership of the funds with an
obligation to repay the Province of Tarlac the amount
borrowed. Tlh.erelationship between the Province of Tarlac
and the LTIi'I is that of a creditor and debtor. Failure to
pay the Indebtedness would give rise to a collection suit.22
Since the funds subject matter of the indictment of the
petitioners in Ocampo are considered as private in nature, the
Supreme Court held that the Sandiganbayan erred in convicting
the petitioners therein of malversation of public funds: Thus:
22 Emphasis supplied; citations omitted
The Sandiganbayan convicted petitioner Ocampo of
malversation of public funds under Art. 217 of the Revised
Penal Code for his "gross and inexcusable negligence" in not
/?
M/
RESOLUTION
People vs. Pada~a, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-11-
setting up safeguards in accordance with Sec. 203(t) of the
Local Government Code18 for the proper handling of the
NALGU funds in the hands of LTFI which resulted in the
disappearance of PI, 132,739 allegedly malversed in Crim.
Case No. 16794 and the disappearance of P58,000 in Crim.
Case No. 16795.
In his petition, petitioner Ocampo states that he made
sure that proper safeguards were in place within LTFI to
ensure the proper handling of NALGU funds by LTFI. On
August 5, 1988, before the Province ofTarlac and LTFI entered
into the MOA, LTFI's Articles of Incorporation were amended
to add the following:
TENTH: That no part of the net income of
the Foundation shall inure to the benefit of any
member of the Foundation and that at least
seventy percent (70%) of the funds shall be used
for the projects and not more than thirty percent
(30%) of said funds shall be used for
administrative purposes.
Petitioner Ocampo argues that since he had resigned
from LTFI both as chairperson and as trustee on June 22,
1988, he ceased to become accountable for the handling of the
NALGU funds after the same were loaned to LTFI pursuant to
the MOA dated August 8, 1988. Consequently, he may not be
held criminally liable for disbursements made by LTFI since
he had nothing to do with its operations after his resignation.
Malversation may be committed by appropriating public
funds or property; by taking or misappropriating the same; by
consenting, or through abandonment or negligence, by
permitting any other person to take such public funds or
property; or by being otherwise guilty of the misappropriation
or malversation of such funds or property.
xxx
There can be no malversation of public funds by
petitioner Ocampo in the instant cases since the loan of
PII.S million transferred ownership and custody of the
funds, which included the sum of money allegedly
~~/
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-12-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
malversed, to LTFI for which Ocampo could no longer be
held accountable. Thus, contrary to the allegation of the
Office of the Special Prosecutor, petitioner Ocampo
cannot. be held culpable for malversation committed
through negligence in adopting measures to safeguard the
money of tile Province of Tarlac, since the same were
neither in his custody nor was he accountable there for
after the loan to LTFI. 23
Thus, petitioner Flores, as the executive director of
LTFI, cannot also be held liable for malversation of public
funds in a contract of loan which transferred ownership of the
funds to LTFI making them private in character. Liwanag v.
Court of Appeals held:
... in a contract of loan once the money is
received by the debtor, ownership over the same
is transferred. Being the owner, the borrower can
dispose of it for whatever purpose he may deem
proper.
The Sandiganbayan erred when it stated that the
intention of the parties was for the funds to remain public,
citing the MOA which allegedly provided, thus:
The Province shall have the right to have
access to all resources and records of either LTF[I]
or BUILD and may conduct COA examination or
audit on any or all matter affecting the loans or
assets covered by this agreement and funds from
the Province of Tarlac.
A review of the MOA did not show the presence of such
provision. But the cited provision is contained in the TMOA,
which was later entered into by the Province of Tarlac, LTFI
and BUILD, whereby LTFI transferred part of its obligation to
BUILD.
2J Emphasis supplied
What is controlling in the instant cases is that the
parties entered into a contract of loan for each release of
NALGU funds. The second release on October 24, 1988
included the subject funds in controversy. By virtue of the
contract of loan, ownership of the subject funds was
~
M(
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-13-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
transferred to LTFI making them private in character, and
therefore not subject of the instant cases of malversation
of public funds.
The Court notes that the obligation of LTFI to repay the
NALGU Funds of P56,618,403 obtained by it from the
Province of Tarlac pursuant to the MOA was extinguished as
follows:
(1) BUILD assumed LTFI's principal loan of P40 million;
(2) LTFI ceded, transferred and assigned to the Province
of Tarlac all the rights and interests of LTFI in certain loans
including interests, certificate of time deposit and certain Juki
embroidery machines in the total amount of P16,618,403.
As to the second issue, the Supreme Court held that the
Sandiganbayan erred in ruling that the MOA entered into by the
Province of Tarlac with LFTI is void because the petitioner was
not authorized by the Sangguniang Panla1awigan to do so.
According to the Supreme Court, the said MOA is not void but
merely unenforceable under Article 1403 of the Civil Code.
Thus:
The Court holds that since petitioner Ocampo was not
duly authorized by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan to enter
into the MOA, the agreement is an unenforceable contract
under Sec. 1403 of the Civil Code:
Art. 403. The following contracts are
unenforceable, unless they are ratified:
(1) Those entered into in the name of
another person by one who has been given no
authority or legal representation, or who has
acted beyond his powers; x x x.
Unenforceable contracts are governed by the following
provisions of the Civil Code:
Art. 1404. Unauthorized contracts are
governed by article 1317 and the principles of
agency in Title X of this Book.
/?
tb
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al,
Criminal Case Nos. SB-I1-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
:·4-
Art. 1317. No one may contract in the name
of another without being authorized by the latter,
or unless he has by law or right to represent him.
A contract entered into in the name of
another by one who has no authority or legal
representation, or who has acted beyond his
powers, shall be unenforceable, unless it is
ratified, expressly or impliedly, by the person on
whose behalf it has been executed, before it is
revoked by the other contracting party.
The Court finds that the MOA has been impliedly
ratified by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan as it has not directly
impugned the validity of the MOA despite knowledge of this
controversy. Implied ratification is also shown by the following
acts:
1) The Sangguniang Panlalawigan subsequently
recognized the transfer of liabilities of LTFI in favor of the
Province of Tarlac to BUILD in the amount of P40 million
contained in a TMOA.32
2) It authorized petitioner Ocampo to sign in behalf of
the Province of Tarlac the Deed of Assignment entered into by
the Province of Tarlac and LTFI33 which extinguished the
remaining loan obligations of LTFI obtained under the MOA.
Plainly, the factual milieu of Ocampo is so far removed
from the facts established in these cases.
First. Unlike in Ocampo, the MOA entered into by
accused Padaca and EDWINLFI was not one of loan. The MOA,
subject matter of these cases, pertinently provided the
following:
xxx
Whereas, one of the flagship programs of the PROVINCE
is to uplift the quality of life of our rice farmers through a
Provincial Rice Program, which is intended to increase the
farmers' earning potenti~
ft\
RESOLUTION
People vs. Pada~a, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-15-
xxx
Whereas, one of the major aspects of the Provincial Rice
Program is to provide a Supervised Credit Facility for our
Farmer's Cost of Production;
Whereas, to ensure the proper monitoring of the
Supervised Credit Facility and the overall success of the
Provincial Rice Program, the credit facility as well as the other
aspects of the program should be managed, administered and
implemented by an organization composed of persons with
technical, financial and managerial expertise;
Whereas, the PROVINCE considering its other
development priorities, is constrained by personnel and other
limitations to efficiently manage, administer and implement
the Provincial Rice Program;
Whereas, the PROVINCE has evaluated the technical,
financial and managerial competence of the FOUNDATION
and has agreed to enter into an agreement allowing the
FOUNDATION to manage, administer and implement the
PROVINCIAL RICE PROGRAM;
xxx
ARTICLE 2 - OBLIGATIONS OF THE PROVINCE
The PROVINCE undertakes to:
xxx
2.3 Provide the FOUNDATION with the funding
requirement for the implementation of the Program which
includes but is not limited to the following:
1. Funds needed for the Supervised Credit
Aspect of the Provincial Rice Program
2. Funds needed for the Operational
requirement- of the Provincial Rice Program ~.Ai I
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x---------------------------------------------------__-------x
-16-
as Personnel Salaries, and Maintenance and
Other Operational Expenses;
xxx
ARTICLE 3 - OBLIGATIONS OF THE FOUNDATION
The FOUNDATION undertakes to:
1. Issue an Official Receipt to the PROVINCE for the
funds provided by the PROVINCE to the FOUNDATION;
xxx
3. Provide overall technical and operational leadership
in the administration, management and implementation of
the Provincial Rice Program;
xxx
6. Implement a system for the proper receipt, custody,
release and disbursements of the FOUNDATION's funds,
inventory and other assets;
xxx
11. Provide the PROVINCE with a report on the
Disbursement of Funds, the Financial Condition and
Operations, and the overall performance of the Provincial Rice
Program;
xxx
13. Supervise and be totally responsible for the overall
implementation of the Provincial Rice Program.v'
As can be seen above, under the MOA that was entered
into by the Province of Isabela, through accused Padaca, and
EDWINLFI, the said province undertook to provide the funding
requirement for the implementation of the Provincial Rice
Program. EDWINLFI, on the other hand, undertook to
manage, administer and implement the said program. There
is nothing in the subject MOA which suggests, even faintly, that
the Province of Isabela transferred the money to EDWINLFI
under a contract of loan. The MOA clearly and categorically
/?
~I24 Exhibit P-2; Exhibit N for the prosecution and Exhibit 4 for the defense
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x-------- --- ----------------- -------------- ---------- ------ --x
-17-
stated that EDWINLFI shall supervise and be totally responsible
for the overall implementation of the program.
Second. Since the MOA that was entered into by the
Province of Isabe1a, through accused Padaca, with EDWINLFI
was not a contract of loan, the money that was given to the latter
remained to be public funds; hence, accused Padaca, as the
then Governor of the Province of Isabela, was duty-bound to
protect and safeguard the same conformably with Section 465
(b) (3) (v) of the Local Government Code, to wit:
Section 465. The Chief Executive: Powers, Duties,
Functions, and Compensation.
xxx
(b) For efficient, effective and economical governance
the purpose of which is the general welfare of the province and
its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code, the
provincial governor shall:
xxx
(3) Initiate and maximize the generation of resources
and revenues, and apply the same to the implementation of
development plans, program objectives and priorities as
provided for under Section 18 of this Code, particularly those
resources and revenues programmed for agro-industrial
development and country-wide growth and progress and,
relative thereto, shall:
xxx
(v)Adopt adequate measures to safeguard and conserve
land, mineral, marine, forest and other resources of the
province, in coordination with the mayors of component cities
and municipalities; provide efficient and effective property and
supply management in the province; and protect the funds,
credits, rights, and other properties of the province;25
As the then Governor of the Province of Isabela, and as the
person who signed the MOA with EDWINLFI and authorized the
release of the PhP25,OOO,OOO.OO to the latter, accused Padaca
should have ensured that the money owned by the province was
/7
h!25 Emphasis supplied
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-18-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
amply protected and would be returned in whole to the
provincial coffers. However, the subject MOA did not contain
any provision at all regarding the terms of the repayment of the
said amount. This actually led to the misappropriation of the
PhP18,000,000,OO as EDWINLFI has not yet accounted for it to
this very day. Thus, for being grossly and inexcusably negligent
in allowing EDWINLFI to take public funds without any scheme
for its repayment, accused Padaca should be made liable for
malversation of the said amount.
To reiterate, malversation may be committed by
appropriating public funds or property; by taking or
misappropriating the same; by consenting, or through
abandonment or negligence, by permitting any other person
to take such public funds or property; or by being otherwise
guilty of the misappropriation or malversation of such funds or
property. 26
Third. Adrnittedly, the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of the
Province of Isabela eventually ratified the MOA that was entered
into by accused Padaca with EDWINLFI in its Resolution No. 03
dated January 31,2007.27
However, the ratification by the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan of the Province of Isabela of the subject MOA,
more than a year after its execution, did not operate to
extinguish accused Padaca's criminal liability for malversation
of public funds which had already incipiently attached.
Pondevida vs. Sandiganbayan28 teaches that the taking
of funds is completed and consummated although the
severance of the funds from the possession was only for an
instant. Here, accused Padaca consented to the transfer of the
PhP25,000,000.00 to EDWINLFI without authority from the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan. Thus, from the precise moment
that accused Padaca allowed EDWINLFI to take possession of
the subject funds, without authorization from the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan, together with the other attending circumstances,
~
4/
26 Pondevida vs. Sandiganbayan, 467 seRA 219 (2005)
27 Exhibit 0 for the prosecution and Exhibit 5 for the defense.
28 Supra
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x-- -------------------- -- -------- ------------- --------- ----- -x
-19-
the crime of malversation of public funds was already
consummated.
Also, while the subject MOA was ratified by the
Sangguniang Panglalawigan the following year, the fact remains
that the MOA did not include any provision for the repayment
scheme of the PhP25,OOO,OOO.OO that EDWINLFI received from
the Province of Isabela to ensure that the interest of the said
province would be properly protected. To reiterate, as the then
Governor of Isabela, it was the statutory duty of accused Padaca
to protect the said public funds. As discussed above, however,
she affixed her signature to a MOA which was grossly deficient
in protecting the interest of her province. Thus, the belated
ratification of the MOA by the Sangguninag Panlalawigan did
not operate to insulate accused Padaca from criminal liability
for malversation of public funds due to her gross and
inexcusable negligence.
Accused Padaca, however, claims that the Court erred in
finding that she "failed to use the reasonable care and caution
which an ordinary person would have used in the same situation
when she authorized the release of the P25)000)000.00 to
EDWINLFI."29 She insists that the "MOA contained safeguards to
protect the integrity of the funds and their proper disbursement
by EDWINLFI including a repayment scheme which was couched
thereat as Collections. The latter was required under the MOA to
keep and maintain accounting and auditing systems to show
how the funds were being disbursed and EDWINLFI was
obligated to submit reports to the province. In the COA Report
dated October 2) 2008) it is indicated therein that reports were
submitted to the Province) except that they were not in the
'standard format" and that "EDWINLFI was subject to audit by
the COA."30
The Court finds the aforesaid claims without merit.
29 p. 14, Motionfor Reconsideration;p. 609, V01XXI, Record
30 p. 14, id;p. 609, id
The pieces of evidence presented by the prosecution
established beyond an iota of doubt that accused Padaca was
/?
)1/
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-20-
X---"--------------------------------------------------------x
grossly negligent when she authorized the release of
PhP25,000,000.00 to EDWINLFI.
First. Under the Local Government Code, accused Padaca,
as the provincial governor, has authority to "sign in its behalf
all ... contracts, and obligations, and .... upon authority of
the sangguniang panlalawigan. or pursuant to law or
ordinance. "31 In complete disregard of the said requirement of
the Local Government Code, accused Padaca entered into a
MOA with EDWINLFI without authority from the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan considering that when she signed the same on
January 8, 2006, she was not yet authorized by the
Sangguniang Panglalawigan to do so. To be sure, Resolution No.
09 of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of the Province of Isabela,
which authorized her to negotiate and enter into a MOA on
behalf of the Provincial Government of Isabela with people's
organizations or non-governmental organizations for purposes
of implementing the priority hybrid rice program of their
province, was only issued on January 31,2006.32
More importantly, the same resolution required that the
MOA that would be entered into by accused Padaca "shall be
submitted for review and ratification of the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan." Despite the unequivocal tenor of the said
resolution, accused Padaca did not submit the MOA she entered
into with EDWINLFI for the review and ratification of the
Sangguniang Panlalawigan of- Isabela. On the contrary, she
allowed the release of the amount of PhP25,000,000.OO to
EDWINLFI twenty-three (23) days after the issuance of the same
resolution.
Second. The Provincial Accountant of Isabela wrote
accused Padaca informing her of the need to submit a number
of documents from the SEC pursuant to COA Circular No. 96-
003 dated February 27, 1996, and that there is a need to
include a provision for the repayment of the PhP25,OOO,000.OO
in order to protect the interest of the Province of Isabela.v'
Accused Padaca chose to ignore the said recommendations of
the Provincial Accountant of Isabela and allowed EDWINLFI to
31 Section 465 (b) (1) (vi), Local Government Code
32 Exhibit P-8; Exhibit M for the prosecution and Exhibit 3 for the defcnse.
33 Exhibit V
~
~/
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaea, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-21-
receive the PhP25,000,000.00 without the said security
measure.
Third. Accused Padaca asserts that the "MOA did not
create a creditor-debtor relationship between EDWINLFI and the
Province of Isabela; hence, the absence of a 'repayment scheme. '
Under the MOA, it was understood that EDWINLFI had
automatically tum over or remit to the Province of Isabela the loan
repayments by the farmers. "34
It is true that the MOA subject matter of this case did not
create a creditor-debtor relationship between EDWINLFI and
the Province of Isabela. However, it is undeniable that the
provincial funds amounting to PhP25,000,000.00 were
transferred by the Province of Isabela, by virtue of the MOA
entered into by accused Padaca, to EDWINLFI. As such, the
said money remained to be public funds and should have been
amply protected by accused Padaca as the Provincial Governor.
Indeed, accused Padaca should have seen it that the NGO,
which will be entrusted with the PhP25,000,000.00 for the
implementation of its provincial rice program, is competent and
qualified to do so. However, as shown by the evidence presented
by the prosecution, when accused Padaca entered into a MOA
with EDWINLFI on January 8, 2006, the latter had no existing
General Information Sheets and Financial Statements on file
with the SEC.35 Plainly, accused Padaca entrusted the
PhP25,OOO,OOO.OO to EDWINLFI without first establishing the
latter's competence and proven track record in handling a credit
facility of this magnitude.
Assuming that the farmers in the Province of Isabela
benefitted from its Provincial Rice Program administered by
EDWINLFI and that the latter already automatically turned over
or remitted the loan repayments to the Province of Isabela, the
COA Report dated October 2, 2008,36 should have reflected the
same. However, based on the same report, EDWINLFI still has
an outstanding balance of PhP18,OOO,OOO.OO out of the
/?
ftb/
3~ p. 15,Motionfor Reconsideration;p. 610, Vol. XXI, Record
35 Please refer to CertificateifCorporateFiling/lnfonnationdated November 15,2013, Exhibit J.
36 Exhibit Y
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-22-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
PhP25,000,000,00 it received from the Province of Isabela. This
fact is corroborated by the testimony of Pete Gerald L. Javier,
the Provincial Accountant of the Province of Isabela, who
testified that EDWINLFI remitted only the total amount of
PhP7,000,000.OO to their province in 2007. From that time
on until -Javier testified in Court on June 28, 2016,
EDWINLFI no longer returned any amount to the Province
of Isabela. 37
Fourth. Section 465 (b) (3) [v] of the Local Government
Code mandates that accused Padaca, as the Governor of the
Province of Isabela, should have adopted measures to protect
the subject funds owned by her province. However, despite
being made aware of the deficiency of the MOA she entered into
with EDWINLFI, she never exercised her mandated duty to
protect the same which paved the way for the malversation of
the amount of PhP18,000,000.00.
Accused Padaca, however, claims that upon "the transfer
of the funds to EDWINLFI, the task and the responsibility of
monitoring the disbursements devolved upon the Provincial
Treasurer who, under Section 370 (sic) of the Local Government
Code, is charged with the duty to take custody of and exercise
proper manaqemeni of funds of the local government unit
concerned and take charge of the disbursement of all local
government funds. "38
The Court finds the said argument devoid of merit.
Section 470 (d) of the Local Government Code reads:
Section 470. Appointment, Qualifications, Powers, and
Duties.
"""/7
37 pp. 26-27, TSN, June 28, 2016
38 p. 14, Motionfor RetrJltsidera!iol1;p. 609, Vol. XXI, Record
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------- --~------ ----------------- -------- ----- --x
-23-
(d)The treasurer shall take charge of the treasury office,
perform the duties provided for under Book 11of this Code,
and shall:
(2) Take custody of and exercise proper
managemen t of the funds of the local
government unit concerned;
(3) Take charge of the disbursement of all
local government funds and such other funds
the custody of which may be entrusted to him by
law or other competent authority;
Plainly, the provincial treasurer is duty-bound to exercise
proper management of the funds of the concerned province and
shall take charge of the disbursement of all local government
funds the custody of which may be entrusted to him by law or
other competent authority.
Here, the PhP25,000,000.00 was not entrusted to the
provincial treasurer of the Province of Isabe1a but to EDWINLFI
conformably with the MOA that was entered into by accused
Padaca with the former. Therefore, accused Padaca cannot
ten ably shift the responsibility over the management and
disbursement of the said amount to the provincial treasurer
since the physical custody of the said amount was already
transferred by her to EDWINLFI. Indeed, Section 470 of the
Local Government Code finds no application to these cases. As
between the said provision and Section 465 (b) (3) (v)of the same
Code, the latter provision, which imposes a positive duty on
accused Padaca as provincial governor to safeguard the funds
of her province, prevails.
B.
Criminal Case No. SB-II-CRM-0283
For: Violation of Section 3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019
//
)1
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-·II-CRM-0282-0283
-24-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
1. Accused Padaca should be
acquitted of the crime of
violation of Section 3 (e) of
R.A. No. 3'019.
--------------------------------------------------
Accused Padaca claims that the" Prosecution failed toprove
beyond reasonable doubt that the Accused gave unwarranted
benefits and advantage to EDWINLFI by 'dispensing with the
conduct of public bidding' and transferring the amount of
P25, 000, 000. 00 to EDWINLFI 'for services yet to be rendered. "'39
"The Court, however, convicted the accused essentially based on
its findings that EDWINLFI was not qualified to be the
implementor of the Isabela rice program and the non-compliance
by the Accused with the requirements of COA Circular No. 96-
003, facts which are not alleged in the Information. To reiterate,
no law criminalizes non-compliance of COA Circular No. 96-
003. "40 Accused Padaca thus concludes that her "conviction is
based on facts not alleged in the Information, a violation of the
constitutional right of the Accused to be informed of the nature
and cause of the accusation against her.i+'
On the other hand, the prosecution asserts that the Court
correctly convicted accused Padaca of the crime of Violation of
Section 3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019. According to the prosecution,
while "public bidding was not required in the selection of a
partner people's organization, the manifest partiality on movant
Padaca's part was still proved. Aside from dispensing with the
submission of the documentary requirement for EDWINLFI's
accreditation, she entered into a MOA without the required
authority from the SP. Moreover, she approved the release of
funds to EDWINLFI without the authority, or at the very least the
review and ratification of the MOA as required in SP Resolution
09."42 ~
Kb39 p. 16, Motionfor Reconsideration;p. 611, Vol. XXI, Record
ro id;id
~I id;id
42 Par. 19, Prosecution's Opposition;p. 629, Vol. XXI, Record
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-25-
It is doctrinally settled that criminal cases, where the life
and liberty of the accused is at stake, due process requires that
the accused be informed of the nature and cause of the
accusation against him. An accused cannot be convicted of an
offense unless it is clearly charged in the complaint or
information. To convict him of an offense other than that
charged in the complaint or information would be a violation of
this constitutional right.v'
The important end to be accomplished is to describe the
act with sufficient certainty in order that the accused may be
apprised of the nature of the charge against him and to avoid
any possible surprise that may lead to injustice. Otherwise, the
accused would be left in the unenviable state of speculating why
he is made the object of a prosecution.v'
In Burgos vs. Sandiganbayan,45 the Sandiganbayan
convicted the petitioners therein of the crime of Violation of
Section 3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019 after it determined that the latter
"falsely [made] it appear in the Reports of Inspection and
Disbursement Vouchers that the 19 surveying instruments had
all been repaired in the manner specified in the Job Orders, thus,
allowing full payment to Castaiieda, causing undue injury to the
Government." This, despite the fact that the Information
charging the petitioners with the crime of Violation of Section 3
(e) of R.A. No. 3019 alleges that the said petitioners "willfully
enterfed] into a contract with the said Ricardo Castaeda, who
actually received the same, despite their being aware and
knowing fully well that the said survey instruments were not
actually repaired and rendered functional! operational, thereby
causing undue injury to the government and giving themselves
unwarranted benefits and advantage) through manifest
partiality and/or evident bad faith in the discharge of their
official and administrative functions) in the aforementioned
amount of P83) 850."
43 Burgos vs. Sandiganbayan, 413 seRA 385 (2003); citations omitted
-l4 id
45 id
On appeal, however, the Supreme Court reversed the
conviction of the petitioners in the said case after it found that
//
fb
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-26-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
the basis of their conviction was not alleged in the Information.
Thus:
From a legal point of view, and in a very real sense, it is
of no concern to the accused what is the technical name of the
crime of which he stands charged. It in no way aids him in a
defense on the merits. Whatever its purpose may be, its result
is to enable the accused to vex the court and embarrass the
administration of justice by setting up the technical defense
that the crime set forth in the body of the information and
proved in the trial is not the crime characterized by the fiscal
in the caption of the information. That to which his attention
should be directed, and in which he, above all things else,
should be most interested, are the facts alleged. The real
question is not did he commit a crime given in the law some
technical and specific name, but did he perform the acts
alleged in the body of the information in the manner therein
set forth ... The real and important question to him is, "Did
you perform the acts alleged in the manner alleged?" not, "Did
you commit a crime named murder?" If he performed the acts
alleged, in the manner stated, the law determines what the
name of the crime is and fixes the penalty therefor. If the
accused performed the acts alleged in the manner alleged,
then he ought to be punished and punished adequately,
whatever may be the name of the crime which those acts
constitute.
There is no question that the manner of commission
alleged in the information and the act the Sandiganbayan
found to have been committed are both violations of Section
3(e) of R.A. 3019. Nonetheless, they are and remain two
different means of execution and, even if reference to
Section 3(e) of R.A. 3019 has been made in the
information, appellants conviction should only be based
on that which was charged, or included, in the
information. Otherwise, there would be a violation of their
constitutional right to be informed of the nature of the
accusation against them.
In Evangelista v. People, a judgment of conviction by the
Sandiganbayan, for violation of Section 3(e) of the Anti-Graft
and Corrupt Practices Act, was reversed by the Court on the
ground that accused was made liable for acts different from
those described in the information. The accused therein was
convicted on the finding that she failed to identify with
certainty in her certification the kinds of taxes paid by
Tanduay Distillery, Inc., although the information charged her
with falsifying said certificate. The Court said that,
~A\)!
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-27-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
constitutionally, the accused has a right to be informed of the
nature and cause of the accusation against her. To convict her
of an offense other than that charged in the complaint or
information would be a violation of this constitutional right.
Contrary to the stand of the prosecution, the allegations
contained in the information and the findings stated in the
Sandiganbayan decision are not synonymous. This is clearly
apparent from the mere fact that the defenses applicable for
each one are different. To counter the allegations contained in
the information, petitioners only had to prove that the
instruments were repaired and rendered
functional/ operational. Under the findings stated in the
Sandiganbayan decision, petitioners defense would have been
to show not only that the instruments were repaired, but were
repaired in accordance with the job order.ev
In this case, the Information charging accused Padaca with
the crime of Violation of Section 3 (e) ofR.A. No. 3019 reads:
That on 23 February 2006, or sometime prior or
subsequent thereto, in Isabela, Philippines, and within the
jurisdiction of this Honorable Court, the accused, Maria
Gracia Cielo M Padaca, a public officer, being the Governor of
the Province of Isabela, committing the crime in the discharge
of her official functions, acting together, conspiring, and
confederating with Provincial Legal Officer Atty. Johnas M
Lamonera, Municipal Councilor Servando Soriano, and
Dionisio Pine, a private individual, in their respective
capacities as Director, Chairman, and Manager, respectively,
of the Economic Development for Western Isabela and
Northern Luzon Foundation, Inc. (EDWINLFI), a non-
government organization, through manifest partiality, evident
bad faith, or gross inexcusable negligence, did then and there
willfully, unlawfully and criminally give unwarranted benefits,
and advantage to EDWINLFI, by then and there directly
contracting under the authority of the Memorandum of
Agreement dated 08 January 2006 which had not been
ratified until after 31 January 2007, the services of
EDWINLFI to manage, administer and implement the
Provincial Rice Program of Isabela, more particularly the
Supervised Credit Facility, thereby dispensing with the
conduct of public bidding in violation of the provisions of
Republic Act No. 9184, otherwise known as the
Government Procurement Reform Act, and by then and
there transferring public funds in the amount of Twenty-
/J
frbl
46 Emphasis supplied; citations omitted
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-28-
Five Million Pesos, Philippine Currency
(PhP25.000,OOO.OO) in Cavor of EDWINLFI Cor services yet
to be rendered. 47
CONTRARY TO LAW.
Plainly, the Information alleges that accused Padaca,
among other accused, committed the crime of Violation of
Section 3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019 by directly contracting "under the
authority of the Memorandum of Agreement dated 08 January
2006 which had not been ratified until after 31 January 2007,
the services ofEDWINLFI to manage, administer and implement
the Provincial Rice Program of Isabela, more particularly the
Supervised Credit Facility, thereby dispensing with the conduct
of public bidding in violation of the provisions of Republic Act
No. 9184, otherwise known as the Government Procurement
Reform Act, and by then and there transferring public funds in
the amount of Twenty-Five Million Pesos, Philippine Currency
(PhP25.000,000.00) in favor Of EDWINLFI for services yet to be
rendered."
However, based on the evidence presented during the trial
of these cases, the Court found that the selection of EDWINLFI
as the NGO partner of the Province of Isabela in the
implementation of its Provincial Rice Program did not actually
require a public bidding under the pertinent provisions of R.A.
No. 9184 because the subject transaction did not involve
procurement. Instead, the Court found that, based on the
prosecution evidence, accused Padaca failed to comply with the
requirements of COA Circular No. 96-003 in the selection of
EDWINFLI. On this basis, the Court convicted the said accused.
After a second hard look at the obtaining facts in this case,
coupled with the doctrinal teachings of the Supreme Court in
Burgos, the Court gives its approbation to accused Padaca's
argument that to convict her of the crime of Violation of Section
3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019 for her failure to comply with the
requirements of COA Circular No. 96-003 in the selection of
~
'Y47 Emphasis supplied
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
-29-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
EDWINLFI violates her constitutional right to be informed of the
nature and cause of the accusation.
First. Although the Information in Criminal Case No. SB-
ll-CRM-0283 charges a violation of Section 3 (e) of R.A. No.
3019 against accused Padaca, the allegation in the Information
on how she committed the said crime, i.e., dispensing with the
conduct of public bidding in violation of the provisions of R.A.
No. 9184, is starkly different from what was proven by the
prosecution during the trial of this case, i.e., accused Padaca
failed to comply with the requirements of COA Circular No. 96-
003 in the selection of EDWINLFI, an overt act constituting an
elemen t of the crime charged which should have been alleged in
the Information. Thus, conformably with the teachings of the
Supreme Court in Burgos, accused Padaca cannot be convicted
of the said charge against her without impinging on her
constitutional right to be informed of the nature and cause of
the accusation against her.
Second. The evidence of accused Padaca to counter the
allegations in the Information consists of showing that she did
not give unwarranted benefits and advantage in the selection of
EDWINLFI because it did not need to undergo the required
public bidding under R.A. No. 9184. It is thus unfair to convict
her of the crime of Violation of Section 3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019
after finding that public bidding is not applicable to the
selection of the Province of Isabela's NGO partner in the
implementation of its provincial rice program. Indeed, accused
Padaca was not informed, and, was not therefore properly
apprised, that the charge against her for violation of Section 3
(e) of R.A. No. 3019 includes her failure to comply with the
requirements under COA Circular No. 96-003 in the selection of
EDWINLFI.
Third. The allegations in the Information in Criminal
Case No. SB-II-CRM-0283 stating that accused Padaca
dispensed with "the conduct of public bidding in violation of the
provisions of Republic Act No. 9184, otherwise known as the
Government Procurement Reform Act, and by then and there
transferring public funds in the amount of Twenty-Five Million
Pesos, Philippine Currency (PhP25. ODD,000. 00) in favor Of
EDWINLFI for services yet to be rendered," are ultimate facts.
~I
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et al.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-I1-CRM-0282-0283
-30-
x------------------------------------------------------------x
They are not mere evidentiary facts which may be established
during the trial of the case.
Ultimate facts are defined as "those facts which the
expected evidence will support. The term does not refer to the
details of probative matter or particulars of evidence by which
these material elements are to be established." It refers to the
facts that the evidence will prove at the trial.48 Ultimate
facts have also been defined as the principal, determinative, and
constitutive facts on whose existence the cause of action rests;
they are also the essential and determining facts on which the
court's conclusion rests and without which the judgment would
lack support in essential particulars.s?
Evidentiary facts, on the other hand, are the facts
necessary to establish the ultimate facts; they are the premises
that lead to the ultimate facts as conclusion. They are facts
supporting the existence of some other alleged and
unproven fact. 50
Applying the said precepts to this case, the allegations in
the Information that accused Padaca dispensed with "the
conduct ofpublic bidding in violation of the provisions of Republic
Act No. 9184, otherwise known as the Government Procurement
Reform Act, and by then and there transferring public funds in
the amount of Twenty-Five Million Pesos, Philippine Currency
(PhP25.000,000.00) in favor Of EDWINLFI for services yet to be
rendered," are clearly the principal, determinative, and
constitutive facts on whose existence the crime of violation of
Section 3 (e) of R.A. No. 3019 rests. Indeed, the determination
of whether accused Padaca complied with the public bidding
requirement under R.A. No. 9184 in the selection of EDWINLFI
should be the sole basis of the Court in passing upon the guilt
or innocence of the herein accused for the crime of Violation of
Section 3 (e) ofR.A. No. 30n
}1~8 Enrile vs. People, 766 SeRA 1 (2015)
~9 id;citations omitted
;0 id;citations omitted
RESOLUTION
People vs. Padaca, et a1.
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x------------------------------------------------------------x
-31-
WHEREFORE, the Court resolves to:
1. DENYthe Motion for Reconsideration dated December
2, 2019, filed by accused Maria Gracia Cielo M. Padaca in
Criminal Case No. SB-II-CRM-0282 for lack of merit; and,
2. GRANT the Motion for Reconsideration dated
December 2, 2019, filed by accused Maria Gracia Cielo M.
Padaca, in Criminal Case No. SB-II-CRM-0283. Thus,
accused Padaca's conviction for the crime of Violation of Section
3 (e) of R.A. 3019 is hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE and
she is hereby ACQUITTED of the said charge for failure of the
prosecution to prove her guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
The Hold Departure Order issued in Criminal Case No. SB-
11-CRM-0283 is accordingly LIFTED. Likewise, the bail bond
she posted for her provisional liberty in the same case is
ORDERED RETURNED to her, subject to the usual accounting
and auditing requirements.
SO ORDERED.
Quezon City, Metro Manila.
TAJE-
Pre~tice
Chairperson, Third Division
WE CONCUR:
RBSQLU770N
People vs. Padaca. et aL
Criminal Case Nos. SB-II-CRM-0282-0283
x-----------------------------------------------------x
-32-
ATTESTATION
I attest that the conclusions in the above Resolution were reached
in consultation before the case was assigned to the writer of the
opinion of the Court's Division.
'AJE-T~
Presi~stice
Chairperson, Third Division
CERTIFICATION
Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 13 of the Constitution, and the
Division Chairperson's Attestation, it is hereby certified that the
conclusions in the above Resolution were reached in consultation
before the case was assigned to the writer of the opinion of the Court's
Division.
•••
~AROM~TANG
Presiding Justice
